
---
title: "At the Beginning"
date: 2022-06-01
description: "A personal Journey of Writing"
tags: ["personal essay"]
type: post
showTableOfContents: false
---

The idea of writing a blog of my own has long come to my brain for a simple reason: to document ideas that "abruptly" popped into my mind and might leave in the next second. Trained in social science, I have been so used to writing academic papers but I had limited chances of doing what I really wanted, i.e. going back to the origin of writing, thinking about why to write, and writing what I want to write. Now in graduate school, I finally have the ability and time to, instead of completing a task, write things as a way to communicate with my inner heart and share my ideas, joys, sorrows, and frustrations with the outer world. I am not a professional writer, and I believe that my writing could be rough in many places. However, I am happy that I finally have the space to be myself in the form of writing, which I think is the most important. 

$\textbf{Writing, Writer, and I}$ 

I was born and raised in China, where I spent my first 18 years. My interest in writing started in high school, which came as a side product of my interest in Chinese history and literature. My mom had been very against my passion for literature and writing probably since the very beginning because as she said, boys should be scientists or doctors. A former doctor herself, she had been hoping that I could follow down her path and be a physician to make up for her loss, a thought she didn't give up until a few years ago when she clearly knew that I had been too far away from this occupation to go back (and that I, "sadly", am not the boy who would listen to every word of her and do as she pleases). 

As a high schooler, my interests were in history, art, and ancient Chinese poems. Those fields are uninterest to me now for a number of reasons, which I don’t want to elaborate on here. My early experience was influential in that it made me more sensitive to words and sentences for which I learned how to write English quickly, just as I learned Chinese writing quickly from a beginner in high school. I learned English sentences and structures from a variety of sources including games (I used to be a Choice player), academic papers, novels, and journalism. When I was a freshman, I was clueless about things like how to draft an email or how to make my paper grammar-free, but now I am perfect at those. This is not equivalent to saying I am a flawless writer. I am still far away from that end and there is no such thing as a perfect writer (because we appreciate writing differently), however, that end is no longer unreachable for me.       

In Chinese, the word writer/作家 is often perceived negatively because writers are commonly regarded as the acronym for novelists, which in a lot of people’s impressions, are cureless idealists who make little contributions to society. Some people believe that stories can not save lives nor accelerate the progress of the country. Moreover, the threshold of writing is low enough that there is a stereotype that, unlike doctors or engineers, writing is “unprivileged” because everyone can write and everyone knows how to write. This is especially the case in the age of the internet when information explodes daily and a lot of low-quality writing popped up. With too many cheap writings, people may associate writers with words that they should not have, for example, liars because a lot of online authors are masters of story fakers, which further worsens the reputation of this group (writers). 

However, writers are more than novelists. Are people who write autobiographies writers? What about people who write about games, who do strategic communication, or who report authentic news? Despite we assign different names for these people in both Chinese and English (autobiographers, freelance game writers, and strategic communication specialists), they are all writers if we follow the dictionary meaning of this word - “the group of people who write”. The field of writing is vast, gorgeous, and magnificent as writing could be as small as chats between friends or as grand as omnibus bills that can be a few thousand pages long. It is also useful because regardless of occupations, we rely on words to communicate. My technical writing professor in my undergrad school loves to say technical writing is an art. It is not only technical writing but all forms of writing are arts. Writers matter because we live in a world with words. 

My passion for technical and policy writing sprouted when I was a sophomore (at the University of Minnesota Twin Cities). That was the year when I started volunteering with a nonprofit organization named Communities United Against Police Brutality (aka, CUAPB) and worked on a project with the mission of investigating the police killing of Mr. Thurman Blevins in Minnesota. I went to the organization every Thursday night to discuss with Ms.Gross, the founder of the organization, and other volunteers, conduct research on things that are of significance to this case, and support the writing of our investigative report, which was later handed to the lawyer representing the Blevins family and used in the court. When the project wrapped up and the report was final, the whole workgroup went to dinner together during which we talked about how the report might bring justice to the victim and I suddenly felt so proud. That was the first time I helped an organization write an evidence-based report, and knowing my work would pay off made me so happy. I realized that writing could be so beautiful.

Many things happened after that year. I continued volunteering with the organization in my free time (until I graduated from U of M and left the city), and my interest in writing continued. I took more social science classes, read a lot more research articles and case briefs, and continuously found the diversity and usefulness of writing. For example, research articles may bring important findings in front of the public and politicians’ eyes and promote the passing of good laws or policies, case briefs can serve as references to future case rulings, and technical documents are able to help organizations achieve their missions. 

Some years later, I applied for grad school and got into the Harris School of Public Policy at U Chicago, where I conducted public consulting in the Applied Policy Communication Lab course. It was interesting when I talked to a client and researched potential solutions to their struggles. I completed a strategic communication report for the client at the end and offered concrete suggestions. Additionally, this summer I worked as a financial and strategic analyst for the Skokie School District through Education Pioneer. In this new role, I helped the district draft technical documents that would effectively help teachers and students in the district. My experience and writing skills further grew. 

Now I am ready to launch my next stage of writing. I have a myriad of articles and initiatives in mind. For example, fascinated by people’s stories, I want to open a narrative series of Chicago residents’ experiences with the criminal justice system. With writing, I am building my impact.     



