---
title: "Opinion: Math Should not be the Antonym of Social Justice"
date: 2022-09-18
description: "A recent policy passed in California reforms the state's math education teaching by opening advanced math classes, such as AP Calculus, that were traditionally preserved for White and Asian students to everyone. The policy may prove to be beneficial. Here is why."
tags: ["Opinion", "Policy", "Education"]
type: post
showTableOfContents: false
---

From the No Child Left Behind to the Every Student Succeed Act, President Bush and Obama had one common goal: improving the US’s educational performance in the world. Since the mid-last century, the United States was never ranked No.1 in terms of K12 education. This is especially the case for the subject of math, which it is constantly placed [at the bottom among developed countries](https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/education/2020/02/28/math-scores-high-school-lessons-freakonomics-pisa-algebra-geometry/4835742002/&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1663571825629896&usg=AOvVaw0c17ATFG0B8YCCucaayrb0).  
 
[The Brookings Institute](https://www.brookings.edu/blog/brown-center-chalkboard/2017/02/01/race-gaps-in-sat-math-scores-are-as-big-as-ever/) measured Americans’ math abilities using the SAT math score in a study in 2017, where they found in light of different racial groups, over 50% of Black students received a score below 450, which is the low-score range of the continuum. In the same test, most Whites scored between 450 and 600.  

There are a couple of reasons for this remarkable racial achievement gaps. Racial minorities are usually not familiar with the examples used in math teaching nor do they know why they should learn math. Additionally, they usually have poor resiliency compared to their White peers that they are more likely to give up in face of struggles and say “I don’t know” or “I can’t do it”. Lastly, they were instilled with low expectations from their teachers and school administrators. A lot of math teachers don’t believe that Blacks can also be good at math, and they expressed their “differential treatment” in their everyday teaching by requiring less from students of color. The consequence is obvious as minority kids grew up internalizing the stereotype. When they lost faith that they can excel in math like their White and Asian classmates, their mental pessimism will obstruct them from being successful. 

I believe that teaching should focus on helping students answer the following questions: “Why am I learning this?” and “Where will I use this?”. It becomes so much easier when kids were able to understand the purpose of learning and pick up the initiative so that the teaching shifts from passive instruction to active learning. The approach will also build resiliency as students who are motivated by their curiosity will also want to grasp the class topics regardless of hurdles. I used to work as a classroom assistant at Roosevelt High School of Minnesota, where I found very few students could tell me their replies to the above two questions. Instead, “I will have an exam after the unit”, “The teacher required me to learn this”, and “I have no choice” are some common answers students used in contending why they took math classes. 

In education literature, two important concepts are frequently mentioned: "windows"" and "mirrors". According to [educator Emily Style](https://nationalseedproject.org/Key-SEED-Texts/curriculum-as-window-and-mirror), students need mirrors to see the experiences of themselves and their social identity groups, and they rely on windows to understand others and better stand in their shoes. One pitfall of the current k-12 system is that the White-centered curriculum predominately pffers mirrors for White students, but is constantly insufficiently opening windows for Black students. 

At the first step of the reform, math teachers could start immersing these two concepts in their day-to-day teaching to boost kids' interests and close the distance between class materials and students' lives. Here is an example. I worked as a 9th-grade math teaching fellow last summer (summer of 2020) at Breakthrough Twin Cities, where I enjoyed the freedom of selecting any math-relevant topics to teach and designing my own lesson plans. I narrowed my teaching objectives to two points: cultivating data mindsets and highlighting the use of data to manifest stratified racism. For example, in the class where its topics were mean and median, I began my class by asking students how many of them had encounters with police officers. I saw a few "Me" in the Google Meet chatbox. I then asked "what is one example of racial profiling?" A few murmured that Black people were more frequently stopped and searched by police. I smiled and then asked them how could we measure the magnitude of stop and frisk and how the magnitude might vary across diverse racial groups. Some raised their hands. After another round of discussion, I showed the data and asked them to calculate the means and medians of the number of encounters Whites, Blacks, and Asians respectively had with police officers in the past 1 year. 

By incorporating exercises that are social justice-oriented, I made my math class a social justice class. Students left each lesson with takeaways that built their data proficiency and promoted compassion. By introducing controversial topics, such as stop-and-frisk, in an objective lens, I also taught them how to think about social problems and the importance of math.  

[A recent guideline in California](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/11/04/us/california-math-curriculum-guidelines.html) served as a good example of how a policy could achieve similar effects. The guideline proposes to include more social justice components in public school math teaching and gives all students a chance to receive accelerated math knowledge, such as statistics and calculus.     

The guideline refused the myths that some people are more naturally talented than others and there is no ground for social justice in math and science education because 1 + 1 can only be 2 by claiming that students could learn math operations in more than one way. For example, proving a math equation can shed also light on broader social issues that are relevant to minorities.  

Should the guideline be successfully introduced, we will see a new age of math education where the focuses of math instructions fall on cultivation Black and Hispanic students’ passions for math and foster them to realize how math can be useful. 


*Note: The original version of this article was written in December 2021*
